---
---

# Migrate from V2 to V3

Ballast v3.0.0 is a major release, which some breaking changes in its public API and significant improvements to its
internals. Most of these changes were introduced in a way that is source backward-compatible, but no attempt was made to
maintain strict binary backward-compatibility. Most projects that were compiled with Ballast v2.3 should be able to be 
updated to Ballast v3.0 and still compile, though a library that depends on Ballast v2.3 may need to be recompiled 
against Ballast v3 to work properly.

The breaking changes are intended to be easily adopted, with deprecations introduced from v2.3 and automatic fixes
available. Features that were already marked as deprecated in v2.3 have been removed.

See below for the complete list of changes, and how to update your project to support these changes.

## Dependency artifact changes:

- `ballast-firebase-analytics` and `ballast-firebase-crashlytics` modules are reimplemented for all platforms as basic
  reporting
    - `ballast-firebase-analytics` implementation (without Firebase dependency) is now in `ballast-analytics`.
      `ballast-firebase-analytics` depends on `ballast-analytics` and adds `FirebaseAnalyticsTracker`.
      `FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor` is now deprecated
    - `ballast-firebase-crashlytics` implementation (without Firebase dependency) is now in `ballast-crash-reporting`.
      `ballast-firebase-crashlytics` depends on `ballast-crash-reporting` and adds `FirebaseCrashReporter`.
      `FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor` is now deprecated
- `ballast-core` has been broken out into several smaller artifacts: `ballast-api`, `ballast-logging`,
  `ballast-viewmodel`, and `ballast-utils`. `ballast-core` depends on all these new artifacts, so no changes are necessary
  unless you wish to pick which of these core modules you need.

## Breaking Changes

- Changes to `BallastNotification`
    - `BallastNotification` previously had a hard reference to the `BallastViewModel` which emitted the notification, which
      led to potential issues with memory leaks or incorrect usage within an Interceptor. The intended use-case for this
      property was to give access to the name of the VM for debugging purposes, so `BallastNotification.vm` has been
      replaced with `BallastNotification.viewModelType` and `BallastNotification.viewModelName`
- `name` and `type` properties are no longer exposed through the `BallastViewModel` interface. These were intended to be
  used by Interceptors for debugging, but because of the changes to `BallastNotification`, are no longer necessary as
  part of the `BallastViewModel` public API.
- A new subclass of `Queued` has been added: `Queued.CloseGracefully`.
- `fetchWithCache()` can now be used from any ViewModel, rather than being restricted to `BallastRepository`. This was 
  done by adding a new `Events` type parameter, so it now takes 3 type paramters rather than 2
- `Cached` can now be used with nullable values, by removing the bounds of its type parameter 
- Drops support for deprecated KMPP targets: JS Legacy, iosArm32

## New APIs

- `InputHandlerScope.cancelSideJob()` allows you to cancel a running sideJob, rather than needing to create
  an empty one to cancel it.
- `SideJobScope.key` gives you the `key` used to start the sideJob
- `SideJobScope.getInterceptor()` allow you to find an Interceptor that is registered within the ViewModel, for using
  its public members (such as `BallastUndoInterceptor.undo()` or `KillSwitch.requestGracefulShutdown()`)
- `KillSwitch` interceptor, to request graceful shutdown
- `RestoreStateScope.postInput()` and `RestoreStateScope.postEvent()` added as a replacement of
  `SavedStateAdapter.onRestoreComplete`, allowing more flexibility when restoring the state of a ViewModel.
- `AndroidViewModel` and `AndroidBallastRepository` now accept an optional `coroutineScope` which will be passed into 
  the `ViewModel` constructor. If this coroutineScope implements `Closeable`, it will be cancelled when the ViewModel is
  cleared. If it does not implement `Closeable`, it will be wrapped in a `Closeable { }` block to cancel it instead.
- New platform-specific loggers are available:
  - `NSLogLogger` writes to `NSLog` on iOS. Credit goes to [Kermit](https://github.com/touchlab/Kermit) for the 
    implementation, which was copied for this logger.
  - `OSLogLogger` writes to `OSLog` on iOS. Credit goes to [Kermit](https://github.com/touchlab/Kermit) for the 
    implementation, which was copied for this logger.
- You can now intelligently serialize the data sent to the Debugger UI, for example by serializing it to JSON. 
  `BallastDebuggerInterceptor` now has 3 optional properties for `serializeInput`, `serializeEvent`, and 
  `serializeState` which you could use to convert those values into JSON or any other serialized format for improved 
  display in the Intellij Plugin's Debugger UI. By default, values are serialized by calling their `.toString()`, which
  was the previous the default behavior.

## Deprecations

Several features have been deprecated with the release of v3.0.0, which will be removed in Ballast v4. Most of these
changes are simple name changes, or related to the overhaul of ViewModel internals.

### FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor

FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor is deprecated. `AnalyticsInterceptor` is the intended replacement, which is now
available in all supported targets. In addition to supporting trackers other than Firebase, it also allows you more
flexibility in selecting which Inputs to track, so that you can now track Inputs without needing the
`@FirebaseAnalyticsTrackInput` annotation.

```kt
// Old usage
BallastViewModelConfiguration.Builder()
    .apply {
        this += FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor(Firebase.analytics) // FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor class
    }
    .build()

// New usage
BallastViewModelConfiguration.Builder()
    .apply {
        // customized interceptor
        this += AnalyticsInterceptor(
            tracker = FirebaseAnalyticsTracker(Firebase.analytics),
            shouldTrackInput = { it.isAnnotatedWith<FirebaseAnalyticsTrackInput>() },
        )
        // helper function for setting up tracking with Firebase
        this += FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor() // FirebaseAnalyticsInterceptor factory function, which returns AnalyticsInterceptor
    }
    .build()
```

### FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor

FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor is deprecated. `CrashReportingInterceptor` is the intended replacement, which is now
available in all supported targets. In addition to supporting crash reporters other than Firebase, it also allows you
more flexibility in selecting which Inputs to ignore, so that you can now ignore Inputs without needing the
`@FirebaseCrashlyticsIgnore` annotation.

```kt
// Old usage
BallastViewModelConfiguration.Builder()
    .apply {
        this += FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor(Firebase.crashlytics) // FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor class
    }
    .build()

// New usage
BallastViewModelConfiguration.Builder()
    .apply {
        // customized interceptor
        this += CrashReportingInterceptor(
            tracker = FirebaseCrashReporter(Firebase.crashlytics),
            shouldTrackInput = { !it.isAnnotatedWith<FirebaseCrashlyticsIgnore>() },
        )
        // helper function for setting up crash reporting with Firebase
        this += FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor() // FirebaseCrashlyticsInterceptor factory function, which returns CrashReportingInterceptor
    }
    .build()
```

### SavedStateAdapter

`SavedStateAdapter.onRestoreComplete()` was previously used to send an Input after a ViewModel's state had been
restored. This function is now deprecated, and new methods added to `RestoreStateScope` (the receiver of
`SavedStateAdapter.restore()`) which accomplish the same functionality.

```kt
// Old usage
class ExampleSavedStateAdapter(
    private val database: ExampleDatabase,
) : SavedStateAdapter<
        ExampleContract.Inputs,
        ExampleContract.Events,
        ExampleContract.State> {

    override suspend fun SaveStateScope<
            ExampleContract.Inputs,
            ExampleContract.Events,
            ExampleContract.State>.save() {

        saveDiff({ values }) { values ->
            database.saveValues(values)
        }
    }

    override suspend fun RestoreStateScope<
            ExampleContract.Inputs,
            ExampleContract.Events,
            ExampleContract.State>.restore(): ExampleContract.State {
        return ExampleContract.State(
            values = database.selectValues(values)
        )
    }

    override suspend fun onRestoreComplete(restoredState: State): Inputs? {
        return ExampleContract.Inputs.Initialize
    }
}

// New usage
class ExampleSavedStateAdapter(
    private val database: ExampleDatabase,
) : SavedStateAdapter<
        ExampleContract.Inputs,
        ExampleContract.Events,
        ExampleContract.State> {

    override suspend fun SaveStateScope<
            ExampleContract.Inputs,
            ExampleContract.Events,
            ExampleContract.State>.save() {

        saveDiff({ values }) { values ->
            database.saveValues(values)
        }
    }

    override suspend fun RestoreStateScope<
            ExampleContract.Inputs,
            ExampleContract.Events,
            ExampleContract.State>.restore(): ExampleContract.State {
        val restoredState = ExampleContract.State(
            values = database.selectValues(values)
        )
        
        postInput(ExampleContract.Inputs.Initialize)
        
        return restoredState
    }
}
```

### SideJobScope

`SideJobScope.currentStateWhenStarted` is now deprecated, with no direct replacement. This property could lead to race
conditions if the state was changed between the time the sideJob was dispatched and when it was actually started, which
reduces the ability to know exactly what's running within the sideJob block.

Instead, capture a snapshot of the state yourself from the `InputHandlerScope` and pass that object into the sideJob.

```kt
// Old usage
sideJob("key") {
    doSomethingWithState(currentStateWhenStarted)
}

// New usage
val currentState = getCurrentState()
sideJob("key") {
    doSomethingWithState(currentState)
}
```




### BallastInterceptor

`BallastInterceptor` has had 2 callbacks for its usage: `BallastInterceptor.onNotify()` to process Notifications one at 
a time for simple reactive usage, and `BallastInterceptor.start()` for full access to the `Flow<BallastNotification>` 
for more advanced usage. `BallastInterceptor.onNotify()` has been deprecated, so there should only be the single 
entry-point for making new Interceptors. 

```kt
// Old Usage
class CustomInterceptor<Inputs : Any, Events : Any, State : Any> : BallastInterceptor<Inputs, Events, State> {
    override suspend fun onNotify(logger: BallastLogger, notification: BallastNotification<Inputs, Events, State>) {
        // do something
    }
}

// New Usage
class CustomInterceptor<Inputs : Any, Events : Any, State : Any> : BallastInterceptor<Inputs, Events, State> {
    override fun BallastInterceptorScope<Inputs, Events, State>.start(
        notifications: Flow<BallastNotification<Inputs, Events, State>>,
    ) {
        launch(start = CoroutineStart.UNDISPATCHED) {
            notifications.awaitViewModelStart()
            notifications
                .onEach { 
                    // do something
                }
                .collect()
        }
    }
}
```


### JsConsoleBallastLogger

`JsConsoleBallastLogger` is deprecated, to be replaced with `JsConsoleLogger`. This is just a name change, functionality
is identical.

### AndroidBallastLogger

`AndroidBallastLogger` is deprecated, to be replaced with `AndroidLogger`. This is just a name change, functionality
is identical.

### DefaultUndoController

`DefaultUndoController` is deprecated, to be replaced with `StateBasedUndoController`. This is in preparation to 
maintain name-parity with a future feature to add an `InputBasedUndoController`. The `StateBasedUndoController` is also
itself built as a `BallastViewModel`, so you can add Interceptors to this UndoController if you need more advanced 
logging or other features to better manage your undo/redo functionality.

