---
---

# Migrate from V3 to V4

Ballast v4.0.0 is a major release, which some breaking changes in its public API and many changes to its internals. Most
(but not all) changes are source-compatible with Ballast v3, but these changes are not intended to be binary-compatible. 

Below is a list of all changes, broken down by module.

- All modules
  - APIs that were deprecated since v3.0.0 have been removed.
  - The `BallastException` base-class has been removed. Each module had already been using its own Exception sub-types
    where necessary, but these exceptions no longer share a common super-type.
  - Modules which provided their own Inputs and Events classes are now changed to be `sealed interfaces` instead of 
    `sealed classes`.
  - Modules which provided their own Inputs and Events classes are now changed to use data objects.
  - Added proper `toString()` values to Interceptors, for prettier logs
- `ballast-api`/`ballast-core`
  - New API added to `BallastInterceptorScope`: `getInitialState()`. This allows an Interceptor to access the initial 
    state passed to the `BallastViewModelConfiguration`.
  - Began refactoring internals for greater flexibility. This work is only partly done, but some new features are now 
    available for advanced usage:
    - `InputStrategies` no longer require buffering Inputs through a Channel. You may create your own InputStrategy for
      special use-cases that do not use a Channel, like immediately dispatching Inputs, or buffering Inputs though 
      another mechanism such as AWS SQS. A `ChannelInputStrategy` base-class is used to implement the previous 
      functionality of buffering through a channel. The existing `Lifo`, `Fifo`, and `Parallel` InputStrategies all 
      extend this base class, but you are free to extend it yourself if you need to tweak the configuration of the 
      channel.
    - `InputFilter` has been removed as a property of the `BallastViewModelConfiguration`, because the basic idea behind 
      it is not compatible with all InputStrategies. Instead, the `InputFilter` can be passed directly to the 
      `InputStrategies` which are compatible.
    - A new API, `EventStrategy` is now available to provide the same kind of pluggable extensibility for handling 
      Events that is used for Inputs. This feature is still a work-in-progress, use at your own discretion. As with the 
      `InputStrategies`, a `ChannelEventStrategy` provides the basic functionality of buffering Events through a 
      Channel, and you can extend that base class to customize the channel's parameters.
  - `Builder.withViewModel()` now returns a strongly-typed variant of the Builder class, allowing for greater 
    type-safety when applying Interceptors. The new convention, which is somewhat enforced by the builder APIs, is that 
    common Interceptors which don't require specifics about the Contract types (like logging, or attaching the debugger 
    client) should be placed before the call to `builder.withViewModel()`. Interceptors which do need to know specifics
    about the ViewModel instance and its Contract types (like `BootstrapInterceptor`) should go after that call, to 
    ensure the values passed to the interceptor match the ViewModel's types.
- `ballast-debugger`
  - This artifact's dependency coordinates have been renamed to `ballast-debugger-client`.
  - The lambdas passed to the `BallastDebuggerInterceptor` are now encapsulated in the `DebuggerAdapter` interface. 
    Functions on the `BallastDebuggerInterceptor` companion object keep the construction of `BallastDebuggerInterceptor` 
    source-compatible, but you may now create your own instance of `DebuggerAdapter` for easier setup and maintenance.
  - A new concept has been added to the Debugger UI and client: processing Inputs and restoring States from JSON (or
    other serialized state). You simply need to mark your Input and State classes as `@Serializable` with 
    `kotlinx.serialization` to use the built-in `JsonDebuggerAdapter` or `BallastDebuggerInterceptor()` convenience 
    function. Alternatively, if you need to support a different serialization format or use a different serialization 
    library, you can implement a custom `DebuggerAdapter` to deserialize values based on the incoming `ContentType`.
- `ballast-navigation`
  - New Inputs added to the `RouterContract`, to handle some common navigational patterns:
    - `RouterContract.Inputs.PopAllWithAnnotation` allows you to remove the last destinations which have a given 
      `RouteAnnotation`. For example, this may be used if a sub-flow's destinations all have a common annotation, so you 
      can quickly exit the flow by removing all routes with that annotation.
    - `RouterContract.Inputs.PopUntilAnnotation` allows you to remove the last destinations until one is encountered
      with a specific `RouteAnnotation`. For example, this may be used to annotation the first destination of a sub-flow
      with a `RouteAnnotation`, so you can either quickly return to the start of the flow, or return to the destination
      just before starting the flow.
    - `RouterContract.Inputs.PopUntilRoute` has similar behavior to `PopUntilAnnotation`, but uses Route types instead
      of `RouteAnnotation`.
- `ballast-saved-state`
  - You can now access (and return) the default initial state from the `RestoreStateScope` for cases where you want to
    _optionally_ restore the state, rather than recreating the default initial state yourself within the Adapter, or 
    passing the default initial state to multiple locations.
  - New APIs have been added to `SaveStateScope` to allow you to manually determine if a value has been changed, rather 
    than relying on the default `equals` (`!=`) operator. Overrides of `saveDiff()` and `saveAll()` have an additional 
    `isChanged` parameter where you can compare the previous and current values for equality.
- `ballast-test`
  - Test: A new API has been added to `BallastScenarioScope`, `customizeConfiguration()`. This allows you to fully 
    customize the entire Builder configuration used to run the test. 
